Pandemic chronology

Background
.mw
parser
output .hatnote
font
style
italic
.mw
parser
output div.hatnote
padding
left
1.6em
margin
bottom
0.5em
.mw
parser
output .hatnote i
font
style
normal
.mw
parser
output .hatnote
link
.hatnote
margin
top
0.5em
Main article
19 pandemic in 2019
Timeline of the COVID
Phylogenetic analyses
estimate that SARS
CoV
2 first arose in October or November 2019,
evolving from a coronavirus that infects wild bats and spreading to humans through an intermediary wildlife host.
While later research determined that a first patient began to show symptoms as early as 1 December 2019, a cluster of cases was not discovered until the end of December.
Retrospective study would later indicate that 266 people had been infected before the beginning of 2020.
On 31 December, the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission released a briefing on its website about early signs of a pneumonia outbreak in the city.
International news agencies began to report on the outbreak that day,
as did the WHO and the US CDC.

1 January
Xinhua News
reported that the 
Huanan Seafood Market
was closed on 1 January 2020 for cleaning and disinfection.
US CDC Director 
Robert Redfield
was briefed about the severity of the virus from his Chinese counterpart 
George F. Gao
when he was on vacation with his family
according to reports, what he heard 
rattled him
.
The WHO Newsroom stated that 
the causal agent has not yet been identified or confirmed
, and noted it had requested further information from the Chinese authorities to assess the risk.

2 January
A later, February study of patients admitted to the hospital in Wuhan between 16 December 2019 and 2 January 2020 was able to identify, during this time period, a total of 41 patients had contracted the novel coronavirus, 27 
66
with direct exposure to Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market.
All 41 patients were subsequently relocated from the hospital they had originally been diagnosed in to the Jinyintan Hospital in Wuhan, China.
WHO declared that its three concerned levels 
China country office, Regional Office for the Western Pacific and headquarters
have been working together to respond to the outbreak.
91
citation needed
93

3 January
The Chinese government formally notified the US of the outbreak. At a White House briefing in 20 March, Health and Human Services Secretary 
Alex Azar
said officials had been alerted to the initial reports of the virus by discussions between CDC director 
Robert Redfield
and Chinese CDC Director Gao on 3 January. Mr. Azar also told his chief of staff to make sure that the National Security Council was aware that 
this 
the outbreak
is a very big deal
.
The BBC ran its first story on the outbreak.
Health authorities in Wuhan reported 44 cases, a big jump from the 27 reported on Tuesday. Eleven of the 44 were seriously ill, the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission said, although there had been no reported deaths to date. The health of the 121 close contacts of the cases was being monitored.
Chinese scientists at the National Institute of Viral Disease Control and Prevention 
IVDC
ruled out the possibilities for 26 common respiratory pathogens, including influenza A and B virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus metapneumovirus rhinovirus, enterovirus, and other common respiratory viruses. They determined the genetic sequence of the novel 
genus coronaviruses 
naming it 
2019
nCoV
from specimens collected from patients in Wuhan, China, and three distinct strains were established.
China
s 
National Health Commission
NHC
ordered institutions to not publish any information that related to the disease, and ordered labs to either transfer all samples to designated testing institutions, or destroy them. The order did not list any designated testing institutions.
Li Wenliang
, a Wuhan ophthalmologist, was summoned to the Wuhan Public Security Bureau where he was told to sign an official confession and admonition letter promising to cease spreading 
false
rumors
regarding the coronavirus. In the letter, he was reprimanded for 
making false comments by announcing the confirmation of 7 cases of SARS at the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market
that had 
severely disturbed the social order
. The letter stated, 
We solemnly warn you
If you keep being stubborn, with such impertinence, and continue this illegal activity, you will be brought to justice
is that understood
Li signed the confession writing
Yes, I understand.

4 January
The United Nations agency activated its incident
management system at the country, regional, and global level and was standing ready to launch a broader response if it was needed. The WHO
s regional office in Manila said in Twitter posts Saturday
China has reported to WHO regarding a cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, Hubei Province. The Govt has also met with our country office, and updated 
WHO on the situation. Govt actions to control the incident have been instituted and investigations into the cause are ongoing.
The US CDC Director Redfield, following up the previous day
s contact, emailed the Chinese CDC Director, Gao, formally offering to send US experts to China to investigate the outbreak.
The head of the University of Hong Kong
s Center for Infection, Ho Pak
Leung, warned that the city should implement the strictest possible monitoring system for a mystery new viral pneumonia that infected dozens of people on the mainland, as it was highly possible that the illness was spreading from human to human. The microbiologist also warned that there could be a surge in cases during the upcoming Chinese New Year. Ho said he hoped the mainland would release more details as soon as possible about the patients infected with the disease, such as their medical history, to help experts analyze the illness and to allow for more effective preventive measures to be put in place.
The Singapore Ministry of Health said on Saturday, 4 January, that it had been notified of the first suspected case of the 
mystery Wuhan virus
in Singapore, involving a three
year
old girl from China who had pneumonia and a travel history to the Chinese city of Wuhan.
On 5 January, the Singapore Ministry of Health released a press statement stating that the earlier suspected case was not linked to the pneumonia cluster in Wuhan and was also tested negative for the SARS and MERS
CoV.
On 4 January, journalist Helen Branswell wrote that, while social media platforms suggested that China was not being transparent about the outbreak, scientists disagreed. Virologist Ralph Baric commented, 
They have many of the best virologists in the world there that are working on this.

5 January
The number of suspected cases reached 59 with seven in a critical condition. All were quarantined and local medical officials commenced the monitoring of 163 of their contacts. At this time, there had been no reported cases of human
to
human transmission or presentations in healthcare workers.
Zhen
Zhang Yong
, a virologist at Fudan University, deposits the second known complete genome 
Wuhan
Hu
1
in sequence database 
GenBank
.
The sequence record was initially embargoed and thus not visible to the public.
Early investigations into the cause of the pneumonia ruled out 
seasonal flu
, SARS, 
MERS
, and 
bird flu
.
Disease Outbreak News
was WHO
s first international media report summarizing details of the Wuhan outbreak.

6 January
On Monday, 6 January, the Wuhan health authorities announced they continued seeking the cause but had so far ruled out influenza, avian influenza, adenovirus, and coronaviruses SARS and MERS as the respiratory pathogen that had infected 59 people as of 5 January.
The 
New York Times
ran its first story on the outbreak.

7 January
Scientists of the National Institute of Viral Disease Control and Prevention 
IVDC
confirmed the novel coronavirus isolated on 3 January was the pathogenic cause of the viral pneumonia of unknown etiology 
VPUE
cluster, and designated the disease as a novel coronavirus
infected pneumonia 
NCIP
.
Scientists in China announced the discovery of a new coronavirus.
In a closed meeting of the 
Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party
, 
Xi Jinping
made requests for the prevention and control work of the coronavirus outbreak
and issued instructions to similar ends. This meeting occurred 13 days before Xi
s first public comments on the outbreak on 20 January.
Since the outburst of social media discussion of the mysterious pneumonia outbreak in Wuhan, China, Chinese authorities censored the hashtag 
WuhanSARS and were now investigating anyone who was allegedly spreading misleading information about the outbreak on social media.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
CDC
created an 
incident management system
and issued a travel notice Monday for travellers to Wuhan, Hubei province, China due to the cluster of cases of pneumonia of an unknown etiology
.

8 January
South Korea authorities put a 36
year
old Chinese woman under isolated treatment amid concerns that she had brought back a form of viral pneumonia that had sickened dozens in mainland China and Hong Kong in the previous weeks.
The unidentified woman, who worked for a South Korean company near capital Seoul, had experienced cough and fever since returning from a five
day trip to China on 30 December, the KCDC said in a press release. The woman had spent time in Wuhan, China, but had not visited the Huanan Seafood Market.
91
citation needed
93

9 January
First reported death
The first death from the virus occurred in a 61
year
old man who was a regular customer at the market. He had several significant medical conditions, including chronic liver disease, and died from heart failure and pneumonia. The incident was reported in China by the 
health commission
via 
Chinese state media
on 11 January.
The WHO confirmed that the novel coronavirus had been isolated from one person who had been hospitalized.
On the same day, the 
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
posted its first risk assessment.
The WHO also reported that Chinese authorities had acted swiftly,
identifying the novel coronavirus within weeks of the onset of the outbreak, with the total number of positively tested people being 41.
Chinese scientists reported on Chinese state broadcaster CCTV that they had found a new 
coronavirus in 15 of 57 patients with the illness in the central city of Wuhan, saying it has been preliminarily identified as the pathogen for the outbreak
.
The scientists announced that the current 
Wuhan Virus
, a coronavirus, appears to not be as lethal as SARS. They reported that the new viral outbreak was first detected in the city of Wuhan on 12 December 2019.
Additionally, a total of 59 people have been identified as contracting the illness, seven patients had been in a critical condition at some stage, and no healthcare workers were reported as having been infected.

10 January
Genome sequence becomes public
The genome of the isolated 2019
nCoV, a virus from the same family as the SARS coronavirus, was posted on 
Virological.org
by 
Edward Holmes
on behalf of Zhang Yong
Zhen of Fudan University, Shanghai.
The sequence had already been uploaded to 
GenBank
on 5 January 2020, but was embargoed and thus not available to the public. Shortly thereafter, three genetic sequences of the isolated novel coronavirus from the 
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
, one from the 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
, and one from 
Wuhan Jinyintan Hospital
were posted to 
GISAID
.
On 10 January 2020, Li Wenliang, Chinese ophthalmologist and coronavirus whistleblower, started having symptoms of a dry cough. On 12 January 2020, Wenliang started having a fever. He was admitted to the hospital on 14 January 2020. His parents also contracted the coronavirus 
presumably from Wenliang
and were admitted to the hospital with him. Wenliang tested negative several times for the coronavirus until finally testing positive on 30 January 2020.
He died on 7 February 2020.
First two patients in 
Shenzhen
, Guangdong, China attend 
Shenzhen Hospital
University of Hong Kong
.

11 January
The first two patients in Shenzhen city transferred into a negative pressure room in Third People
s Hospital of Shenzhen City due to matching lab test results, symptoms, and epidemiology and are being listed as suspected cases. The cases were not confirmed at the time, because requirement from the Chinese government at the time was that first case in each city needs to be submitted to provincial CDC, verified by national CDC, and then evaluated and confirmed by a specific diagnostic team in national CDC.

11
